README.md, before:

# KMP Log
[![Maven Central](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/net.codinux.log/kmp-log/badge.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/net.codinux.log/kmp-log)

Idiomatic Kotlin Multiplatform logging facade with appenders for all supported KMP platforms.

## Setup

### Gradle

```
implementation("net.codinux.log:kmp-log:1.1.0")
```

## Usage

### Kotlin style

```kotlin
    package com.example.service
    
    import net.codinux.log.logger
    
    class OrderService {
        private val log by logger() // automatically uses declaring class / OrderService::class.name as logger name
      
        fun showUsage() {
            log.info { "Message with ${heavyCalculation()}" } // lambda and therefor heavyCalculation() gets only called if INFO level is enabled
    
            log.error(e) { "An error occurred" } // e is a throwable
        }
    }
```

The log lambdas like `info { }`, `warn { }`, ... are only called if the according log level is enabled.  
Therefor there's no need for String formats like `log.info("Message with %s", heavyCalculation())` as `"Message with ${heavyCalculation()}"` of example above gets only called if INFO level is enabled.

With `by logger()` the logger name gets automatically derived from declaring class. In above example it would by `"com.example.service.OrderService"`.  
And the logger instance gets instantiated lazily on its first usage (or never if it never gets called).

If the logger is declared in a companion object automatically the enclosing class gets used as logger name
(like in the following example `OrderService` instead of `OrderService.Companion`).  
Except on JavaScript, there the logger name will always be `"Companion"`.

```kotlin
    import net.codinux.log.logger
    
    class OrderService {
      companion object {
        private val log by logger() // automatically uses enclosing class = OrderService::class.name as logger name (except on JavaScript)
      }
    }
``` 

### Classically:

```kotlin
package com.example.service

import net.codinux.log.LoggerFactory

class OrderService {
    private val log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(OrderService::class)
    // or:
    private val logByName = LoggerFactory.getLogger("OrderService")
  
    fun showUsage() {
        log.info("An info message: $detailedMessage") // string get directly concatenated whether INFO level is enabled or not

        log.error("An error occurred", e) // e is a throwable
    }
}
```

You might ask why is there no overload with format arguments like `fun info(message: String, exception: Throwable? = null, vararg arguments: Any)`.  
This is due to the restrictions of Kotlin multiplatform as there's no `String.format()` available (also the format specifier differ, e.g. `%s` on the JVM and `%@` on iOS and macOS).  
So if you like to format the log message, please use lambda variants.

## Log appenders

KMP-Log by ships with a lot of log appenders. Depending on the platform by default these appenders are used:

### JVM

If slf4j is on the classpath: **slf4j**.

Otherwise: **Console** (`println()`)

### Android

**Logcat**

### Apple system (macOS, iOS, iPadOS, watchOS, tvOS)

If available (iOS 10.0+, iPadOS 10.0+, macOS 10.12+, Mac Catalyst 13.1+, tvOS 10.0+, watchOS 3.0+): **OSLog**

Otherwise: **NSLog**

### JavaScript

**JavaScript Console** (`console.log()` / `console.error()` / ...)

### Native

**Console** (`println()`)

### Custom

You can also use add your custom log appender by implementing Appender interface:

```kotlin
  LoggerFactory.addAppender(CustomAppender()) // CustomAppender implements Appender interface
```

If you dislike above default appenders and want to control logger creation entirely implement ILoggerFactory and call:
```kotlin
  LoggerFactory.setLoggerFactory(MyCustomLoggerFactory())
```


## MDC (Java only)

KMP-Log has some convenience functions if values should get added to MDC (Mapped Diagnostic Context) only for the next log message and should then automatically get cleared again:

```kotlin
  log.withMdc("key1" to "value1", "key2" to "value2").info { "Info" }
```

Or
```kotlin
  runWithMdc("key1" to "value1") {
    log.info { "Info" }
  }
```

## Terminology

The terminology is mostly identical with slf4j / logback.

### LoggerFactory

Primary facade to create a [Logger](#logger), e.g.  
`private val log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(OrderService::class)`.

KMP-Log ships with two LoggerFactories:
- [Slf4jLoggerFactory](kmp-log/src/javaCommonMain/kotlin/net/codinux/log/slf4j/Slf4jLoggerFactory.kt) that delegates logging to slf4j, so that on JVM any logging framework that implements slf4j can be used. 
Gets automatically used if slf4j is on the classpath and its ILoggerFactory implementation is any other than [NOPLoggerFactory](https://www.slf4j.org/apidocs/org/slf4j/helpers/NOPLoggerFactory.html).
- [DefaultLoggerFactory](kmp-log/src/commonMain/kotlin/net.codinux.log/DefaultLoggerFactory.kt) that delegates logging to system's default log appender (see [Log appenders](#log-appenders)).

### Logger

Interface to log messages at different levels (Info, Error, ...) , e.g.  
`log.error(e) { "Calculating Fibonacci numbers for $number failed" }`.

### Appender

- If a messages gets accepted by a Logger, Appender do the actual work of 'writing' log messages.
- Multiple appender can be defined so that one logged messages e.g. gets written to console, to a file (only available via a slf4j compatible logging framework), to [Elasticsearch](https://github.com/codinux-gmbh/ElasticsearchLogger), [Loki](https://github.com/codinux-gmbh/LokiLogAppender), ...
- All Loggers use the same appenders. (It's not possible to set an appender for a specific Logger like as logback.)
- Except ConsoleAppender KMP-Log doesn't implement any Appender itself but delegates on to native loggers like Logcat, OSLog, JavaScript Console, slf4j, ...


# License

    Copyright 2023 codinux GmbH & Co. KG

    Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
    you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
    You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

    Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
    distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
    WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
    See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
    limitations under the License.

Commit message:

Added kmp-log-graal with substitution so that kmp-log also works in native images created with GraalVM without reflection

README.md, after:

# KMP Log
[![Maven Central](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/net.codinux.log/kmp-log/badge.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/net.codinux.log/kmp-log)

Idiomatic Kotlin Multiplatform logging facade with appenders for all supported KMP platforms.

## Setup

### Gradle

```
implementation("net.codinux.log:kmp-log:1.5.1")
```

### Native Images (e.g. Quarkus native)

For native images use

```
implementation("net.codinux.log:kmp-log-graal:1.5.1")
```

which substitutes calls to reflection. (As otherwise each class for which a Logger gets created would need to be annotated with `@RegisterForReflection`.)

## Usage

### Kotlin style

```kotlin
    package com.example.service
    
    import net.codinux.log.logger
    
    class OrderService {
        private val log by logger() // automatically uses declaring class / OrderService::class.name as logger name
      
        fun showUsage() {
            log.info { "Message with ${heavyCalculation()}" } // lambda and therefor heavyCalculation() gets only called if INFO level is enabled
    
            log.error(e) { "An error occurred" } // e is a throwable
        }
    }
```

The log lambdas like `info { }`, `warn { }`, ... are only called if the according log level is enabled.  
Therefor there's no need for String formats like `log.info("Message with %s", heavyCalculation())` as `"Message with ${heavyCalculation()}"` of example above gets only called if INFO level is enabled.

With `by logger()` the logger name gets automatically derived from declaring class. In above example it would by `"com.example.service.OrderService"`.  
And the logger instance gets instantiated lazily on its first usage (or never if it never gets called).

If the logger is declared in a companion object automatically the enclosing class gets used as logger name
(like in the following example `OrderService` instead of `OrderService.Companion`).  
Except on JavaScript, there the logger name will always be `"Companion"`.

```kotlin
    import net.codinux.log.logger
    
    class OrderService {
      companion object {
        private val log by logger() // automatically uses enclosing class = OrderService::class.name as logger name (except on JavaScript)
      }
    }
``` 

### Classically:

```kotlin
package com.example.service

import net.codinux.log.LoggerFactory

class OrderService {
    private val log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(OrderService::class)
    // or:
    private val logByName = LoggerFactory.getLogger("OrderService")
  
    fun showUsage() {
        log.info("An info message: $detailedMessage") // string get directly concatenated whether INFO level is enabled or not

        log.error("An error occurred", e) // e is a throwable
    }
}
```

You might ask why is there no overload with format arguments like `fun info(message: String, exception: Throwable? = null, vararg arguments: Any)`.  
This is due to the restrictions of Kotlin multiplatform as there's no `String.format()` available (also the format specifier differ, e.g. `%s` on the JVM and `%@` on iOS and macOS).  
So if you like to format the log message, please use lambda variants.

## Log appenders

KMP-Log by ships with a lot of log appenders. Depending on the platform by default these appenders are used:

### JVM

If slf4j is on the classpath: **slf4j**.

Otherwise: **Console** (`println()`)

### Android

**Logcat**

### Apple system (macOS, iOS, iPadOS, watchOS, tvOS)

If available (iOS 10.0+, iPadOS 10.0+, macOS 10.12+, Mac Catalyst 13.1+, tvOS 10.0+, watchOS 3.0+): **OSLog**

Otherwise: **NSLog**

### JavaScript

**JavaScript Console** (`console.log()` / `console.error()` / ...)

### Native

**Console** (`println()`)

### Custom

You can also use add your custom log appender by implementing Appender interface:

```kotlin
  LoggerFactory.addAppender(CustomAppender()) // CustomAppender implements Appender interface
```

If you dislike above default appenders and want to control logger creation entirely implement ILoggerFactory and call:
```kotlin
  LoggerFactory.setLoggerFactory(MyCustomLoggerFactory())
```


## WebAssembly (experimental)

Version 1.1.3 added experimental support for WASM Browser. While it should work in most circumstances, there is explicitly
currently no support for multithreaded applications due to lack of synchronization mechanisms in Kotlin WASM.


## MDC (Java only)

KMP-Log has some convenience functions if values should get added to MDC (Mapped Diagnostic Context) only for the next log message and should then automatically get cleared again:

```kotlin
  log.withMdc("key1" to "value1", "key2" to "value2").info { "Info" }
```

Or
```kotlin
  runWithMdc("key1" to "value1") {
    log.info { "Info" }
  }
```

## Terminology

The terminology is mostly identical with slf4j / logback.

### LoggerFactory

Primary facade to create a [Logger](#logger), e.g.  
`private val log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(OrderService::class)`.

KMP-Log ships with two LoggerFactories:
- [Slf4jLoggerFactory](kmp-log/src/javaCommonMain/kotlin/net/codinux/log/slf4j/Slf4jLoggerFactory.kt) that delegates logging to slf4j, so that on JVM any logging framework that implements slf4j can be used. 
Gets automatically used if slf4j is on the classpath and its ILoggerFactory implementation is any other than [NOPLoggerFactory](https://www.slf4j.org/apidocs/org/slf4j/helpers/NOPLoggerFactory.html).
- [DefaultLoggerFactory](kmp-log/src/commonMain/kotlin/net.codinux.log/DefaultLoggerFactory.kt) that delegates logging to system's default log appender (see [Log appenders](#log-appenders)).

### Logger

Interface to log messages at different levels (Info, Error, ...) , e.g.  
`log.error(e) { "Calculating Fibonacci numbers for $number failed" }`.

### Appender

- If a messages gets accepted by a Logger, Appender do the actual work of 'writing' log messages.
- Multiple appender can be defined so that one logged messages e.g. gets written to console, to a file (only available via a slf4j compatible logging framework), to [Elasticsearch](https://github.com/codinux-gmbh/ElasticsearchLogger), [Loki](https://github.com/codinux-gmbh/LokiLogAppender), ...
- All Loggers use the same appenders. (It's not possible to set an appender for a specific Logger like as logback.)
- Except ConsoleAppender KMP-Log doesn't implement any Appender itself but delegates on to native loggers like Logcat, OSLog, JavaScript Console, slf4j, ...


# License

    Copyright 2023 codinux GmbH & Co. KG

    Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
    you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
    You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

    Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
    distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
    WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
    See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
    limitations under the License.
